===== SOURCE_FILE: sem 3/Microbiology/Notes/Chapter 4- Basics Of Biosensors And Molecular Motors.pdf =====
CATEGORY: Notes
STATUS: ok

[Page 1]
BASICS OF BIOSENSORS AND 
MOLECULAR MOTORS
Unit 4
 Biosensors
 Types of Biosensors
 Components of biosensors
 Medical applications of biosensors
 Linear motors: actin and myosin
 Rotatory motors: flagella motor and ATPase

[Page 2]
What is a Biosensor?

[Page 3]
“Biosensor” – Any device that uses specific biochemical 
reactions to detect chemical compounds in biological samples.
238 aa

[Page 4]
• 1916 First report on immobilization of
proteins : adsorption of invertase on activated
charcoal
• 1922 First glass pH electrode
• 1956 Clark published his definitive paper on
the oxygen electrode.
• 1962 First description of a biosensor: an
amperometric enzyme electrodre for glucose
(Clark)
• 1969 Guilbault and Montalvo –First
potentiometric biosensor:urease immobilized
on an ammonia electrode to detect urea
History of Biosensors

[Page 5]
• 1987 Blood-glucose biosensor launched by
MediSense ExacTech
• 1990 SPR based biosensor by Pharmacia
BIACore
• 1992 Hand held blood biosensor by i-STAT
• 1996 Launching of Glucocard
• 1998 Blood glucose biosensor launch by LifeScan
FastTake
• 1998 Roche Diagnostics by Merger of Roche and
Boehringer mannheim
• Current Quantom dots, nanoparicles, nanowire,
nanotube, etc
History of Biosensors

[Page 6]
• 1970 Bergveld –ion selective Field Effect Transistor (ISFET)
• 1975 Lubbers and Opitz described a fibre-optic sensor with
immobilised indicator to measure carbon dioxide or oxygen.
• 1975 First commercial biosensor ( Yellow springs
Instruments glucose biosensor)
• 1975 First microbe based biosensor, First immunosensor
• 1976 First bedside artificial pancreas (Miles)
• 1980 First fibre optic pH sensor for in vivo blood gases
(Peterson)
• 1982 First fibre optic-based biosensor for glucose
• 1983 First surface plasmon resonance (SPR)
immunosensor
• 1984 First mediated amperometric biosensor:
ferrocene used with glucose oxidase for glucose detection
History of Biosensors

[Page 7]
Current Definition
A sensor that integrates a biological element with a physiochemical
transducer to produce an electronic signal proportional to a single analyte
which is then conveyed to a detector.


[Page 8]
1. LINEARITY Linearity of the sensor should be high 
forthe detection of high substrate 
concentration.
2. SENSITIVITY Value of the electrode response per 
substrate concentration.
3. SELECTIVITY Chemicals Interference must be 
minimised for obtaining the correct 
result.
4.RESPONSE TIME Time necessary for having 95%
of the response.
Basic Characteristics of a 
Biosensor

[Page 9]
1. The Analyte A substance of interest that needs detection. For instance, glucose is
an ‘analyte’ in a biosensor designed to detect glucose
Protein, toxin, peptide, vitamin, sugar, metal ion.
2. Sample handling Micro fluidics - Concentration increase/decrease,
Filtration/selection
Components of Biosensor
3. Bioreceptor A molecule that specifically recognises the analyte is known as a
bioreceptor. Enzymes, cells, aptamers, deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and antibodies
are some examples of bioreceptors. The process of signal generation (in the form of
light, heat, pH, charge or mass change, etc.) upon interaction of the bioreceptor with
the analyte is termed bio-recognition.
4. Transducer The transducer is an element that converts one form of energy into
another. In a biosensor the role of the transducer is to convert the bio-recognition
event into a measurable signal. Most transducers produce either optical or electrical
signals that are usually proportional to the amount of analyte–bioreceptor interactions.
5. Detection/Recognition How do you specifically recognize the analyte?
6. Signal (How do you know there was a detection)

[Page 10]
Components of a Biosensor
Detector


[Page 11]
Example of biosensors
Pregnancy test
Detects the hCG protein in 
urine. 
Glucose monitoring device (for diabetes patients)
Monitors the glucose level in the blood. 


[Page 13]
Example of biosensors
Infectious disease 
biosensor from RBS
Old time coal miners’ 
biosensor

[Page 14]
Research Biosensors
Biacore Biosensor platform

[Page 15]
✔Fluorescence
✔DNA Microarray
✔SPR Surface plasmon resonance
✔Impedance spectroscopy
✔SPM (Scanning probe microscopy, AFM,
STM)
✔QCM (Quartz crystal microbalance)
✔SERS (Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy)
✔Electrochemical
Typical Sensing Techniques
for Biosensors

[Page 16]
Types of Biosensors
1. Calorimetric Biosensor
2. Potentiometric Biosensor
3. Amperometric Biosensor
4. Optical Biosensor
5. Piezo-electric Biosensor

[Page 17]
Calorimetric Biosensors
If the enzyme catalyzed reaction is exothermic, 
two thermistors may be used to 
measure the difference in resistance
between reactant and product and, hence,
the analyte concentration. 

[Page 18]
Potentiometric Biosensor
– For voltage: Change in distribution of charge 
is detected using ion-selective electrodes, such 
as pH-meters. 

[Page 19]
Piezo-Electric Biosensors
The change in frequency is proportional to 
the mass of absorbed material.
Piezo-electric devices use gold to detect the specific
angle at which electron waves are emitted when the
substance is exposed to laser light or crystals, such as
quartz, which vibrate under the influence of an electric
field.

[Page 20]
Electrochemical Biosensors
• For applied current: Movement of e- in redox 
reactions detected when a potential is applied 
between two electrodes.

[Page 21]
Optical Biosensors
•Colorimetric for color
Measure change in light adsorption 
•Photometric for light intensity
Photon output for a luminescent or 
fluorescent process can be detected with 
photomultiplier tubes or photodiode 
systems.

[Page 22]
Motivated by the application to clinical diagnosis and 
genome mutation detection
Types DNA Biosensors
• Electrodes
• Chips
• Crystals
DNA biosensor

[Page 23]
Electrochemical DNA Biosensor
▪ Steps involved in electrochemical 
DNA hybridization biosensors:
▪ Formation of the DNA recognition layer
▪ Actual hybridization event
▪ Transformation of the hybridization event 
into an electrical signal

[Page 24]
Wearable Biosensors
Ring Sensor
Smart Shirt

[Page 25]
Biosensors on the Nanoscale
❑ Molecular sheaths around the nanotube are developed
that respond to a particular chemical and modulate the
nanotube's optical properties.
❑ A layer of olfactory proteins on a nanoelectrode react
with low-concentration odorants (SPOT-NOSED Project).
Doctors can use to diagnose diseases at earlier stages.
❑ Nanosphere lithography (NSL) derived triangular Ag
nanoparticles are used to detect streptavidin down to
one picomolar concentrations.
❑The School of Biomedical Engineering has developed an
anti- body based piezoelectric nanobiosensor to be used
for anthrax,HIV hepatitis detection.

[Page 26]
❖ Food Analysis
❖ Study of biomolecules and their interaction
❖ Drug Development
❖ Crime detection
❖ Medical diagnosis (both clinical and laboratory use)
❖ Environmental field monitoring
❖ Quality control
❖ Industrial Process Control
❖ Detection systems for biological warfare agents
❖ Manufacturing of pharmaceuticals and replacement 
organs
Application of Biosensor

[Page 27]
Potential Applications
• Clinical diagnostics
• Food and agricultural processes
• Environmental (air, soil, and water) monitoring
• Detection of warfare agents.


[Page 28]
• Biosensors play a part in the field
of environmental quality, medicine 
and industry mainly by identifying 
material and the degree of 
concentration present

[Page 29]
▪Molecular Machines/Motors 
▪Properties of ATP-based Protein Molecular 
Machines 
▪The F0F1-ATP Synthase Motors 
▪Coupling and Coordination of Motors 
▪The Bacterial Flagellar Motor 
▪Flagellar motor structure

[Page 30]
Molecular Machines/Motors
• Molecular machines can be defined as devices that 
can produce useful work through the interaction of 
individual molecules at the molecular scale of length.
• A convenient unit of measurement at the molecular 
scale would be a nanometer. Hence, molecular 
machines also fall into the category of nanomachines.
• As our knowledge and understanding of these 
numerous machines continues to increase, we now 
see a possibility of using the natural machines, or 
creating synthetic ones from scratch, by mimicking 
nature.

[Page 31]
Different types of molecular machines. These machines used by nature 
for force generation and motion. They convert chemical energy into 
mechanical force via conformational changes.


[Page 32]
• Most of the natural machinery is built from 
proteins. 
• These findings help unravel the mysteries 
associated with the molecular machinery and 
pave the way for the production and 
application of these miniature machines in 
various fields, including medicine, space 
exploration, electronics and military. 
• We divide the molecular machines into three 
broad categories—protein based, DNA-
based, and chemical molecular motors.

[Page 33]
Properties of ATP-based Protein Molecular Machines
• Two form the F0F1-ATP synthase, and the third one is the 
bacterial flagellar motor.
• The protein-based molecular motors rely on an energy-rich 
molecule known as adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 
• The machines described in this section, the F0F1-ATPase, the 
kinesin, myosin, and dynein superfamily of protein molecular 
machines, and bacteria flagellar motors all depend, directly or 
indirectly, on ATP for their input energy. 
• These machines have now been segregated out of their natural 
environment and are seen as energy conversion devices to 
obtain forces, torques, and motion. 
• One disadvantage associated with ATP dependence is that the 
ATP creation machinery itself could be many times heavier 
and bulkier than the motors, thereby making it more complex. 
• These machines perform best in their natural environment, 
and in the near future it may be possible to have them as a part 
of biomimetic molecular machinery.

[Page 34]
The F0F1-ATP Synthase Motors
• ATP is regarded as the energy currency of biological 
systems. 
• When this currency is utilized (i.e., the energy of the 
molecule that is used to drive a biological process), 
the terminal anhydride bond in the ATP molecule has 
to be split. This leaves adenosine diphosphate (ADP) 
and a phosphate ion (Pi) as the products, which are 
recombined to form ATP by a super efficient enzyme 
motor assembly called the F0F1-ATP synthase 
(F0F1-ATPase). 
• ATP synthase is present inside the mitochondria of 
animal cells, in plant chloroplasts, in bacteria, and 
some other organisms. 

[Page 35]
• ATP synthase consists of two portions: a membrane-
spanning portion, Fo, comprising the ion channel, and 
a soluble portion, F1, containing three catalytic sites. 
• Both Fo and F1 are reversible rotary motors ---
perhaps the smallest motors known to science. Fo 
uses the transmembrane electrochemical gradient to 
generate a rotary torque to drive ATP synthesis in F1 
or, when driven backwards by the torque generated in 
F1, to pump ions uphill against their transmembrane 
electrochemical gradient. 
• F1 generates a rotary torque by hydrolyzing ATP at 
its three catalytic sites or, when turned backwards by 
the torque generated in Fo, as a synthesizer of ATP.

[Page 37]
The F0F1-ATPase motors. The F0 motor is embedded in the inner mitochondrial 
membrane of the mitochondria. F0 is typically composed of a, b, and c subunits as 
shown. The F1 motor is the soluble region composed of three α-, three β-, one each 
of γ -, δ- and ε-subunits.


[Page 38]
Coupling and Coordination of Motors
• The ATP synthase is actually a combination of two motors 
functioning together, the hydrophobic transmembrane F0-
ATPase motor and the globular F1-ATPase motor 
The F0F1-ATPase contains two rotary motors: the membrane –bound 
F0, driven by the flux of ions across a membrane, and the soluble F1, 
driven by ATP hydrolysis. These two motors are coupled by sharing 
a common motor, drawn in white, and a common stator, drawn dark. 
The figure shows the F0F1-ATPase operating as an ATP-synthase. 
Rotation of F0 driven by ion flux drives F1 in reverse, causing it to 
synthesize ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate. 

[Page 39]
The Bacterial Flagellar Motor
• A flagellum (plural: flagella) is a 
long, slender projection from 
the cell body, composed of 
microtubules and surrounded 
by the plasma membrane. 
• In small, single-cell organisms 
they may function to propel the 
cell by beating in a whip-like 
motion; in larger animals, they 
often serve to move fluids along 
mucous membranes such as the 
lining of the trachea.
• The bacterial flagellar motor is 
a nanotechnological marvel, no 
more than 50 nm in diameter, 
built from about 20 different 
kinds of parts. 
Examples of bacterial flagella 
arrangement schemes. A-
Monotrichous; B-Lophotrichous; 
C-Amphitrichous; D-Peritrichous 

[Page 40]
• It spins clockwise (CW) or 
counterclockwise (CCW) at speeds on 
the order of 100 Hz, driving long thin 
helical filaments that enable cells to 
swim. 
• Peritrichously flagellated cells (peri, 
around; trichos, hair), such as 
Escherichia coli, execute a random 
search, moving steadily at about 30 
diameters per second, now in one 
direction, now in another. 
• Steady motion requires CCW 
rotation. Receptors near the surface 
of the cell count molecules of interest 
(sugars, amino acids, dipeptides) and 
control the direction of flagellar 
rotation. 
• If a leg of the search is deemed 
favorable, it is extended, i.e., the 
motors spin CCW longer than they 
otherwise would. This bias enables 
cells to actively find regions in their 
environment where life is better. 


[Page 41]
• Thus, the flagellar motor is the output organelle of a 
remarkable sensory system, the components of which have 
been honed to perfection by billions of years of evolution.
• A number of bacterial species in addition to E. coli depend 
on flagella motors for motility: e.g., Salmonella enterica 
serovar, Typhimurium (Salmonella), Streptococcus, Vibrio 
spp., Caulobacter, Leptospira, Aquaspirrilum serpens, and 
Bacillus. 
• The rotation of flagella motors is stimulated by a flow of 
ions through them, which is a result of a build-up of a 
transmembrane ion gradient. There is no direct ATP-
involvement; however, the proton gradient needed for the 
functioning of flagella motors can be produced by ATPase.

[Page 42]
Flagellar motor structure
• Bacterial flagella are the only biological structures known that use rotation for 
the purpose of locomotion. 
• Flagella consist of a rotary motor embedded in the cell envelope connected to 
an extracellular helical propeller. The motor is powered by the flow of ions 
down an electrochemical gradient across the cytoplasmic membrane into the 
cell. 
• The ions are typically H+ (protons), although certain marine and alkalophilic 
species have motors driven by Na+. 
• The electrochemical gradient (protonmotive force or sodium motive force) 
consists of a transmembrane voltage and a concentration difference across the 
membrane, both of which are maintained by various metabolic processes. 
• The rotor shown in white (Figure 5), consists of a series of rings spanning the 
cell envelope and is attached via the flexible hook to the helical propeller or 
filament. The stator is a ring of particles in the cytoplasmic membrane, 
containing the proteins MotA and MotB, and anchored to the peptidoglycan 
cell

[Page 43]
The bacterial flagellar motor. The rotor, drawn in white, consists of a series of rings that span 
the cell envelope and are attaches to the extracellular hook and filament. The stator consists 
of a ring of torque-generating units containing the proteins MotA and MotB and anchored to 
the cell wall. Ions flowing through the motor generate torque by means of unknown 
interactions between the rotor and stator in the vicinity of the C-ring. The F0F1-ATPase is 
also shown, to the same scale.


[Page 44]
The fuel/air intake system red, the electrical 
system green, and the exhaust system blue

[Page 45]
Cytoskeleton: Microtubules, Microfilaments, 
and Intermediate filaments
• Cytoskeleton gives the cell shape, 
structure, and physical 
organization
• Motor proteins can rearrange the 
structural elements, or move cell 
components around the 
cytoskeleton.
• The cytoskeleton is in constant state 
of change depending on the 
requirements of the cell.
• 3 major structural elements of the 
cytoskeleton
• Microtubules - hollow, rigid 
cylindrical tubes made from 
tubulin subunits
• Microfilaments - solid, thinner 
structures made of actin
• Intermediate filaments - tough, 
ropelike fibers made of a variety of 
related proteins
Mitochondrion
Plasma membrane
Ribosomes
Rough 
Endoplasmic
reticulum

[Page 46]
The Myosin Linear Motor
• Myosin is a diverse superfamily of motor proteins. 
• Myosin-based molecular machines transport cargoes along actin 
filaments, the two-stranded helical polymers of the protein actin 
that are about 5–9 nm in diameter. They do this by hydrolyzing 
ATP and utilizing the released energy. 
• In addition to transport, they are also involved in the process of 
force generation during muscle contraction, wherein thin actin 
filaments and thick myosin filaments slide past each other. 
• Myosin molecules were first seen (in the late 1950s) through 
electron microscope protruding out from thick filaments and 
interacting with the thin actin filaments. Since that time, ATP 
has been known to play a role in myosin-related muscle 
movement along actin; however, the exact mechanism was 
unknown, until it was explained in 1971.

[Page 47]
Myosin cross-bridge model of contraction. Myosin uses the 
energy released from ATP hydrolysis to move along actin. 


[Page 48]
The Kinesin Linear Motor 
• The kinesin and dynein families of proteins are involved in cellular 
cargo transport along microtubules, in contrast to myosin, which 
transports along actin. 
• Microtubules are 25-nm diameter tubes made of protein tubulin and 
are present in the cells in an organized manner. 
• Microtubules have polarity; one end being the plus (fast-growing) end 
while the other end is the minus (slow-growing) end. 
• Kinesins move from the minus end to the plus end of the microtubule, 
whereas dyneins move from the plus end to the minus end. 
• Microtubule arrangement varies in different cell systems. In nerve 
axons, they are arranged longitudinally such that their plus ends point 
away from the cell body and into the axon. 
• In epithelial cells, their plus ends point toward the basement 
membrane. 
• They extend radially out of the cell center in fibroblasts and 
macrophages with the plus end protruding outward. 
• Similar to myosin, kinesin is also an ATP-driven motor. 
• One unique characteristic of the kinesin family proteins is their 
processivity; they bind to microtubules and literally walk on it for 
many enzymatic cycles before detaching.

[Page 50]
The Dynein Motor
• The dynein superfamily of proteins was discovered in 1965.
• Dyneins exist in two isoforms: cytoplasmic and axonemal. 
• Cytoplasmic dyneins are involved in cargo movement, 
whereas axonemal dyneins are involved in producing 
bending motions of cilia and flagella.
• Because dynein is a larger and more complex structure 
than other motor proteins, its mode of operation is not as 
well known. However, electron microscopy and image 
processing was used to show the structure of a flagellar 
dynein at the start and end of its power stroke, which gives 
some insight into its possible mode of force generation.

[Page 51]
Cilia and flagella have a core axoneme, a complex of microtubules 
and associated proteins.


===== SOURCE_FILE: sem 3/Microbiology/Notes/Chapter 5- Basics Of Biomaterials And Its Applications.pdf =====
CATEGORY: Notes
STATUS: ok

[Page 1]
Metals
Semiconductor 
Materials
Ceramics
Polymers
Synthetic 
BIOMATERIALS
Orthopedic 
screws/fixation
Dental Implants Dental Implants
Heart 
valves
Bone 
replacements
Biosensors
Implantable 
Microelectrodes
Skin/cartilageDrug Delivery 
Devices Ocular 
implants

[Page 2]
Biomaterial Science


[Page 3]
Bileaflet Heart Valves

[Page 4]
Dental Implants

[Page 5]
Intraocular Lenses

 Implantation often performed on 
outpatient basis.


[Page 6]
Vascular Grafts

 Must Be Flexible.

 Designed With Open 
Porous Structure.

 Often Recognized By 
Body As Foreign.


[Page 7]
Hip
-
Replacements


[Page 8]
Normal versus Arthritic Hip
Normal Hip: note the space 
between the femur and 
acetabulum, due to cartilage
Arthritic Hip: No space 
visible in joint, as 
cartilage is missing

[Page 9]
using a Polymethylmethacrylate 
(PMMA) cement to adhere the 
metal to the bone
using a porous metal 
surface to create a bone 
ingrowth interface
Two attachment methods

[Page 10]
the acetabulum and the proximal 
femur have been replaced. The 
femoral side is completely metal. 
The acetabular side is composed 
of the polyethylene bearing 
surface 
Overview of femoral 
replacement


[Page 11]
The two materials are 
bonded and equal force is 
applied to both
Load transfer in Composite materials


[Page 12]
Comparison: Moduli of Elasticity
Modulus of elasticity of different implant materials and bone (in GPa) 


[Page 13]
Implant bonding
A bonded interface is 
characteristic of a 
cemented prosthesis 
(left)
non-bonded interface is 
characteristic of a non-
cemented press fit 
prosthesis (right)

[Page 14]
Degradation Problems
Example of fractured 
artificial cartilage from 
a failed hip 
replacement


[Page 15]
82
b4082 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering 9”x6”
Chapter 4
Biomaterials: Basic principles
4.1 Introduction
Human tissues and organs sometimes fail to perform their regular actions 
due to genetic defects, age, illness, trauma, degeneration, or injuries. 
Some of these conditions are handled with the use of day-to-day medica -
tion, i.e., drugs. However, some cannot be repaired/rectified by providing 
medicines and require the use of unique materials and devices. These then 
bring about the inevitability of surgical repair, which encompasses ana -
tomical sections such as knee joints, elbow joints, vertebrae, teeth, and 
other crucial organs such as heart, skin, kidney, etc. In the broadest sense, 
the unique materials (other than drugs) or combinations of materials that 
are primarily expected to be used inside a mammal or human to treat, 
repair, augment or replace any tissue is referred to as biomaterials. These 
biomaterials can either be formed from nature or physically manufactured 
by utilizing a wide range of physical and chemical methods. 
The field of biomaterials is multidisciplinary (Figure 4.1). The design 
of a simple biomaterial (for example, a bone screw or bone plate) neces -
sitates knowledge and ideas from multiple disciplines. It needs the syner -
gistic integration of materials, biology, medicine, mechanical sciences, 
and chemistry. The number of medical devices used annually by humans 
is significant, estimated at 1.5 million by the World Health Organization, 
with around 10,000 forms of standardized device classes available 
worldwide. 
The term “biomaterials” is often described as any material that comes 
into contact with humans or animals to fulfil their intended function without 
causing any toxic reaction. This is the single most crucial aspect that dif -
ferentiates a biomaterial from any other material, i.e., its capacity to be in 
b4082_Ch-04.indd 82 25-02-2021 9.48.10 AM
 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by 157.51.54.142 on 04/26/23. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.


[Page 16]
b4082 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering9”x6” 
Biomaterials: Basic principles 83
contact with human body tissues without instigating an undesirable degree 
of response. For thousands of years, humans have inevitably used or at least 
attempted to use materials to make devices and instruments of practical 
value by converting basic available substances into materials. Biomaterials 
have a long history of medical use, and at various times they were seen in a 
different way. Based on the development and its uses, the broad definition 
has evolved over the years and could be further expanded as new applica-
tions in medicine emerge. Nevertheless, the meaning of biomaterials 
attained a harmony of opinion by scientists worldwide and is now defined 
now as “a material designed to take a form that can direct, through interac-
tions with living systems, the course of any therapeutic or diagnostic proce-
dure.” In most cases, a biomaterial is any natural or synthetic biocompatible 
material that is used to replace or assist part of an organ or a tissue while 
maintaining close contact with living tissue. They may be produced from 
Figure 4.1: Interdisciplinary system of biomaterials (Cooke et al., 1996; Marin et al., 
2020; Ramakrishna et al., 2010; Ratner, 1996).
b4082_Ch-04.indd 83 25-02-2021 9.48.11 AM
 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by 157.51.54.142 on 04/26/23. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.


[Page 17]
b4082 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering 9”x6”
84 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering
materials including solid, liquid, and gel substances (metallic components, 
polymers, ceramics or composite materials). It should be noted that the bio 
prefix of biomaterials applies to biocompatible, rather than biological or 
biomedical, as many would intuitively assume. 
Biomaterials, a fascinating and highly interdisciplinary area, have 
grown to become an integral component in the modern-day improvement 
of human condition and quality of life. It is accomplished by addressing 
numerous health-related issues that come from several sources. Over the 
past few decades, biomaterials have broadened their applications from 
diagnostics (gene arrays and biosensors) and medical equipment (blood 
bags, surgical tools) to therapeutic medications (medical implants and 
devices) and emerging regenerative drugs (tissue-engineered skin and car-
tilage), and more. Many uses of synthetic and naturally occurring medici-
nal materials can be classified by their place and role in the human body: 
skeletal system (joint replacements, bone fractures and defects, artificial 
tendons and ligaments, dental implants), cardiovascular system (blood ves-
sel prosthesis, heart valves), organs (artificial heart, skin repair), etc. The 
vital applications are presented in Figure 4.2 and tabulated in Table 4.1.
Figure 4.2: Biomaterials have made an enormous impact on the treatment of injury and 
disease and are used throughout the body (Cooke et al., 1996; Kuhn, 2005; Ratner et al., 2020).
b4082_Ch-04.indd 84 25-02-2021 9.48.12 AM
 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by 157.51.54.142 on 04/26/23. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.


[Page 18]
b4082 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering9”x6” 
Biomaterials: Basic principles 85
Table 4.1: Applications of biomaterials.
Organ/Tissue Examples
Heart Biventricular pacemakers, artificial valves, artificial heart
Eye Contact lens, artificial intraocular lens
Ear Hair-clip artificial stapes, cochlear implants
Muscle Sutures
Kidney Dialysis machines
Skin Skin wound repair, burn dressings, skin substitutes, artificial skin
Circulation Synthetic blood vessels
Bone Bone screws, plates, pins, intramedullary rods, bone cement to 
repair defects
Teeth Fillings and replacements 
4.2 Desired properties of biomaterials
As discussed earlier, the ultimate goal of biomaterials in medicine is to 
treat, improve, or substitute tissue organs (e.g., bone, muscle, skin) or 
body function. Such goals can be accomplished by integrating the proper-
ties of materials, nature of the system, device architecture, and physiologi-
cal specifications. The biomaterial application method must combine the 
chemical and mechanical features of the biological system in order to 
achieve the required functional results (Figure 4.3). For the processing of 
biomaterials and related medical items, different elements from science 
and social parameters are also considered.
4.2.1 Biocompatibility
From a biological point of view, biocompatibility is nothing but the 
acceptability of non-living materials (synthetic or natural) in a living body 
(mammal/human). This acceptance is broadly defined as the “ ability of a 
material to perform its desired functions with respect to a medical ther -
apy, to induce an appropriate host response in a specific application and 
to interact with living systems without having any risk of injury, toxicity, 
or rejection by the immune system and undesirable or inappropriate local 
or systemic effects”. Since a biomaterial is intended to be used in intimate 
contact with living tissues, it is important that the implanted material does 
b4082_Ch-04.indd 85 25-02-2021 9.48.12 AM
 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by 157.51.54.142 on 04/26/23. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.


[Page 19]
b4082 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering 9”x6”
86 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering
not cause any undesired reactions to the surrounding tissues and host 
organs. Apart from that, the implanted material is expected not to subdue 
the activity of normal cells or provoke any unwanted local or systemic 
reactions in the recipient, but is encouraged to generate positive cellular 
or tissue response. 
Usually, the criteria for this biocompatibility are dynamic and detailed 
and differ with individual specific medical applications. For example, a 
specially designed material (screw or plate) may possibly be biocompat -
ible in bone implant surgery, but the same components may not be bio -
compatible in skin applications.
4.2.2 Host response
Host response is defined as the “response of the host organism (local and 
systemic) to the implanted material or device” . Most of the materials are 
never inert, and a biomaterial’s clinical success depends significantly on 
the host tissue’s reaction with the foreign material. For material establish-
ment-host tissue interaction, these reactions depend heavily on the time-
length, purpose, and site of implantation. 
4.2.3 Non-toxicity
Toxicity of biomaterials deals with elements that migrate out of the bio -
materials. A carefully designed biomaterial should serve its purpose in the 
Figure 4.3: Primary requirements of new material design.
b4082_Ch-04.indd 86 25-02-2021 9.48.14 AM
 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by 157.51.54.142 on 04/26/23. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.


[Page 20]
b4082 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering9”x6” 
Biomaterials: Basic principles 87
living body’s environment without negatively influencing other cells, 
organs, or the whole organism. It is logical to assume that, unless specifi-
cally designed to do so, a biomaterial should not release or generate any -
thing from its bulk. 
4.2.4 Mechanical properties
In addition to biocompatibility, mechanical properties are embedded in 
biomaterial design prior to implementation and will majorly contribute to 
the outcome. Materials undergo several forces which are primarily stress, 
strain, shear, and a mixture of these. The tensile strength, yield strength, 
elastic modulus, corrosion, creep, and hardness are some of the most 
important properties of biomaterials that should be carefully studied and 
evaluated before implantation. For hard tissue applications, the mechani -
cal properties are of top priority.
4.2.5 Corrosion, wear, and fatigue properties
Wear is often considered as one of the leading causes of implant failure. 
In some cases, wear has also been shown to accelerate the corrosion of 
biomedical devices and implants. The fatigue resistance is related to the 
material’s reaction to repeated cyclic loads.
4.2.6 Design and manufacturability
Appropriate material design is also one of the critical factors to consider 
for biomaterials. For example, in the early 1900s, bone plates were uti -
lized to assist in fixing long bone fractures. Many of these experimental 
plates broke because of their primitive mechanical design where they 
were too narrow and had a stress-focusing corner. Manufacturability is 
the ability to manufacture the item with relative ease that is ideal for its 
intended use at minimal cost and high reliability. Concerning biomateri -
als, the manufacturability, in a broader sense, incorporates the potential 
of the material to be sterilized by a validated sterilization technique 
which is deemed appropriate for biomedical applications. The material is 
b4082_Ch-04.indd 87 25-02-2021 9.48.14 AM
 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by 157.51.54.142 on 04/26/23. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.


[Page 21]
b4082 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering 9”x6”
88 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering
expected to not get impaired by standard sterilizing techniques such as 
autoclaving, dry heat, radiation, ethylene oxide, etc. (see Chapter 8 for 
more details).
In summary, for any material to qualify as a biomaterial, it should 
· Be biocompatible, i.e., non-toxic, non-carcinogenic, non-allergenic, 
etc.
· Have required/suitable physical and chemical properties
· Have suitable mechanical properties
· Have stable durability for the period it is intended for, i.e., hours to 
years
· Be easy to process with the available techniques 
· Be sterilizable with current facilities without any difficulty
· Be cost-effective and accessible
4.3 Types of biomaterials
Depending on the chemical bonding, materials can be categorized into 
three broad groups. These are (i) polymers, (ii) ceramics, and (iii) metals. 
Because these material structures vary by their nature of bonding (cova -
lent, ionic or metallic), they have different properties, and hence different 
uses in the body (Table 4.2). Different kinds of biomaterials and chemical 
bonds associated with it are shown in Figure 4.4. Metals and ceramics are 
differentiated in the field of materials engineering, although they are both 
Figure 4.4: Different kinds of biomaterials and chemical bonds associated with them 
(Gul et al., 2020; He et al., 2017; Zindani et al., 2019).
b4082_Ch-04.indd 88 25-02-2021 9.48.15 AM
 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by 157.51.54.142 on 04/26/23. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.


[Page 22]
b4082 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering9”x6” 
Biomaterials: Basic principles 89
Table 4.2: Classification of biomaterials and typical properties associated with them 
(Wagner, 2020).
Attributes Polymers Metals & Alloys Ceramics
Type of bonds 
present 
Covalent & van der 
Waals forces
Metallic Ionic/Covalent
Melting point Low Intermediate High
Chemical stability Poor Good Very high
Electrical 
conductivity
Very low High Very low, but varies 
Thermal 
conductivity
Very low to 
intermediate
High Low
Properties and 
advantages
Degradable, inert, 
similar density to 
soft tissues and ease 
of processing
High strength and 
hardness
Non-conductive and 
inert; closely 
mimic biological 
properties of bone
Mechanical 
deformation
Very high, plastic (can 
be easily shaped and 
processed)
High (ductile) Low (brittle)
Major issues Thermally unstable; 
low strength
Wear and 
corrosion
High density and 
brittle
Biomedical 
applications
Soft tissue implants; 
drug delivery 
systems; tissue 
engineering
Hard tissue 
applications 
(Orthopedic and 
dental implants)
Tissue engineering
inorganic compounds. Each material has its own benefits and drawbacks, 
and its biomedical applications are decided according to its individual 
properties and intended place substitution. 
4.3.1 Metals
Metals are the most widely known biomedical materials and are indis -
pensable in the medical field. Nearly all of the metal biomaterials are 
crystalline in nature, i.e., with regular atomic arrangements. Metals have 
great strength, resistance to fracture toughness, better elasticity, and 
rigidity compared with ceramics and polymers. Their outstanding 
b4082_Ch-04.indd 89 25-02-2021 9.48.15 AM
 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by 157.51.54.142 on 04/26/23. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.


[Page 23]
b4082 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering 9”x6”
90 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering
mechanical reliability properties are controlled by dislocation and 
crystallization. For this reason, metals are extensively employed for load-
bearing implant applications such as orthopaedic, dental, and maxillofa -
cial surgery. Apart from these, metals are also used in making stents and 
stent-grafts for cardiovascular surgeries. The most common metals and 
alloys used for biomedical applications are stainless steel, titanium, 
titanium-based alloys, cobalt-based alloys, magnesium-based alloys, and 
tantalum-based alloys.
4.3.2 Ceramics
Ceramics are inorganic solid materials consisting of metallic and non-
metallic elements that are predominantly bound together by ionic bonds. 
They exist as both crystalline and non-crystalline (amorphous) com -
pounds. Ceramics are typically characterized by excellent biocompatibil-
ity, high corrosion resistance, high wear, high strength, extremely high 
stiffness, and hardness. The advancement of ceramic material applications 
in the biomedical industry has focused mostly on orthopaedics and den -
tistry. Bioinert ceramics such as alumina (Al 2O3), zirconia (Zr 2O3) and 
pyrolytic carbon, and bioresorbable ceramics such as calcium phosphates 
are some of the widely employed bioceramics. 
4.3.3 Polymers 
Polymers are macromolecules and they represent a major and versatile 
class of biomaterials being widely applied in biomedical applications due 
to their low toxicity in biological fluids, easy pre/post-processing, sterili -
zation, better shelf life, lightweight nature, and remarkable physical and 
chemical properties. 
Biomaterial use is primarily dependent on the need, function, and 
environment of the intended application. In a variety of implants, metal, 
polymers, ceramics, and composites are being used. The specific material 
or material combinations for use in a device will significantly affect both 
its patient performance and marketing potential. The next three chapters 
will discuss in detail each of the material types. 
b4082_Ch-04.indd 90 25-02-2021 9.48.15 AM
 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by 157.51.54.142 on 04/26/23. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.


[Page 24]
b4082 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering9”x6” 
Biomaterials: Basic principles 91
4.4 Multiple choice questions 
1. Biomaterials 
(a) are always synthetic materials; natural materials are not employed 
(b) are always natural materials; synthetic materials are not employed
(c) can be natural or synthetic materials 
(d) are always polymeric materials
2. Select the statement which correctly relates to biocompatibility. 
(a) a biocompatible material should provide healing characters
(b) a biocompatible material should have therapeutic characteristics 
(c) a material is considered as a biocompatible material as long as it 
causes no harm to the host body
(d) a biocompatible material should have the exact dimensions as the 
damaged tissue or part
3. Select the option(s) which do(es) NOT come under the class of bio -
compatible materials. 
(a) eyeglasses; wheelchair
(b) contact lenses; dental implants
(c) orthopedic implant; stents 
(d) external hip prosthesis; massage footwear
4. Which of the following has the best osteointegration properties?
(a) SS316
(b) porous titanium 
(c) Co-Cr alloys 
(d) all of the above 
5. Which of the following is/are biomaterial(s)? 
   I. materials used for tooth filling
  II. materials used for cardiovascular repairs
III. glucose meters and stethoscopes 
 IV. materials used for hip implants 
(a) only I
(b) only I, II and IV
(c) only I, III and IV
(d) only III
b4082_Ch-04.indd 91 25-02-2021 9.48.15 AM
 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by 157.51.54.142 on 04/26/23. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.


[Page 25]
b4082 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering 9”x6”
92 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering
6. Select the option(s) which is/are TRUE about biodegradation.
(a) it depends on the molecular architecture
(b) it is a precise breakdown of the material over time
(c) metals biodegrade faster than polymeric materials 
(d) all of the above 
7. Which class of biomaterials has chemical structures similar to bone? 
(a) polymeric biomaterials 
(b) ceramic biomaterials 
(c) metallic biomaterials 
(d) all of the above 
8. Which class of biomaterials encourages bonding with surrounding 
tissues and stimulates new bone growth?
(a) bioinert ceramics
(b) bioactive ceramics 
(c) Co-Cr alloys 
(d) all of the above 
9. Which of the following is TRUE?
(a) ceramics possess excellent wear and friction properties
(b) SS316, Co-Cr and Ti alloys form a protective oxide layer on their 
surfaces
(c) bioceramics are more reactive then certain metallic implants
(d) all of the above 
References & Further Reading
Cooke, F. W., Lemons, J. E., & Ratner, B. D. (1996). Chapter 1 — Properties of 
Materials. In B. D. Ratner, A. S. Hoffman, F. J. Schoen, & J. E. Lemons 
(Eds.), Biomaterials Science (pp. 11–35): Academic Press.
Ghasemi-Mobarakeh, L., Kolahreez, D., Ramakrishna, S., & Williams, D. 
(2019). Key terminology in biomaterials and biocompatibility. Current 
Opinion in Biomedical Engineering, 10 , 45–50. doi:10.1016/j.cobme. 
2019.02.004.
Gul, H., Khan, M., & Khan, A. S. (2020). Chapter 3 — Bioceramics: Types and 
clinical applications. In A. S. Khan & A. A. Chaudhry (Eds.), Handbook of 
Ionic Substituted Hydroxyapatites (pp. 53–83): Woodhead Publishing.
b4082_Ch-04.indd 92 25-02-2021 9.48.15 AM
 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by 157.51.54.142 on 04/26/23. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.


[Page 26]
b4082 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering9”x6” 
Biomaterials: Basic principles 93
He, W., & Benson, R. (2017). Chapter 8 — Polymeric Biomaterials. In M. Kutz 
(Ed.), Applied Plastics Engineering Handbook (Second Edition) (pp. 145–
164): William Andrew Publishing.
Kuhn, L. T. (2005). Chapter 6 — Biomaterials. In J. D. Enderle, S. M. Blanchard, 
& J. D. Bronzino (Eds.), Introduction to Biomedical Engineering (Second 
Edition) (pp. 255–312): Academic Press.
Marin, E., Boschetto, F., & Pezzotti, G. (2020). Biomaterials and biocompatibil -
ity: A historical overview. Journal of Biomedical Materials Research Part A, 
108(8), 1617–1633. doi:10.1002/jbm.a.36930.
Ramakrishna, S., Ramalingam, M., Kumar, T. S. S., & Soboyejo, W. O. (2010). 
Biomaterials: A Nano Approach: CRC Press Taylor & Francis.
Ratner, B. D. (1996). Biomaterials Science: An Interdisciplinary Endeavor. In B. 
D. Ratner, A. S. Hoffman, F. J. Schoen, & J. E. Lemons (Eds.), Biomaterials 
Science (pp. 1–8): Academic Press.
Ratner, B. D., & Zhang, G. (2020). Chapter 1.1.2 — A History of Biomaterials. 
In W. R. Wagner, S. E. Sakiyama-Elbert, G. Zhang, & M. J. Yaszemski 
(Eds.), Biomaterials Science (Fourth Edition) (pp. 21–34): Academic Press.
Wagner, W. R. (2020). Chapter 1.3.1 — The Materials Side of the Biomaterials 
Relationship. In W. R. Wagner, S. E. Sakiyama-Elbert, G. Zhang, & M. J. 
Yaszemski (Eds.), Biomaterials Science (Fourth Edition) (pp. 83–84): 
Academic Press.
Zindani, D., Kumar, K., & Paulo Davim, J. (2019). Chapter 4 — Metallic bioma-
terials — A review. In J. P. Davim (Ed.), Mechanical Behaviour of 
Biomaterials (pp. 83–99): Woodhead Publishing.
b4082_Ch-04.indd 93 25-02-2021 9.48.15 AM
 An Introduction to Biomaterials Science and Engineering Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by 157.51.54.142 on 04/26/23. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.


===== SOURCE_FILE: sem 3/Microbiology/Notes/Study Material Drive Link.url =====
CATEGORY: Notes
STATUS: url_reference_only

URL: https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1GstO6YIhVnp3YkzmnXLboryZ7pt144e4?usp=drive_link


===== SOURCE_FILE: sem 3/Microbiology/PYQs/No PYQ Available.url =====
CATEGORY: PYQs
STATUS: url_reference_only

URL:
